have you ever noticed how when you open
Instagram or Tik Tok all the
notification symbols are red even though
that's not a common color used within
the rest of those apps well that is a
very deliberate decision cuz
psychological Studies have shown that
people respond quicker to Red than any
other color because we associate it with
danger that requires immediate action
and like have you ever come back from a
holiday when you've not been using your
phone as much and all of a sudden you
have way more notifications from X than
usual often about stuff that you've
never even interacted with these are
called recapture no if ations designed
to make you feel like you've missed out
on so much that you need to get right
back into a new session as fast as
possible and reintroduce the habit of
using the app regularly like if you
don't use Facebook anymore but you still
have the app installed I bet this is
like 99% of your relationship with the
app it's a very similar trick to what
shopping websites use when you abandon
your basket halfway and unless you've
been very literally living under a rock
for the last few years you'll have
guessed why social media companies do
this stuff their entire business model
is the attention economy get more
attention they get to show more better
targeted ads they get more money but
here's the thing if you've seen one of
the thousands of videos all about social
media addiction they tend to boil it
down to dopamine they basically say that
in order to get this attention companies
have got to persistently make the user
feel good they've got to persistently
stimulate a user's production of
dopamine the reward chemical in their
brain but that is not the full story
like I mean for example you know how
some apps have unique notification
sounds and vibr ation patterns like
slack for instance clearly slack want
you to know when you have an important
work alert but then how come apps like X
don't use custom sounds and instead
resort to your phone's default
notification sound I'm getting there but
the point is the reality of what these
tech companies actually do to keep you
addicted is quite a lot deeper and to be
really Frank more Twisted than it first
seems the psychology is very much not oh
let's just make our app really good so
people can't stop using it so let's talk
about it and then how you can be one
step ahead so here's the thing with
dopamine the common perception is that
when good things happen your brain
releases dopamine you feel good but
dopamine isn't just triggered when good
things happen research conducted by Dr
Robert spolski a neuroscientist at
Stanford found that when monkeys were
taught that if they pulled a lever when
a light came on they would receive a
treat their dopamine levels actually
spiked more when the light came on than
when they actually received the treat
revealing that dopamine is in fact more
involved in the anticipation of a reward
and biologically this makes sense cuz
imagine if you only got that reward when
you succeed at something you'd never
learn how to do anything that you
couldn't immediately perfect on your
first try dopamine isn't there in our
brains to make our existences filled
with joy doine is there to drive goal
oriented behavior that makes us want to
aim for things and improve ourselves but
here's the real kicker when spolski
varied the experiment randomizing the
likelihood so that monkeys would only
receive the treat on average 50% of the
time when they pulled the lever their
dopamine levels skyrocketed to double
even though they were only receiving the
reward half the time this is called
variable intermittent reward and it's
one of the most fundamental principles
that social media devs use to keep you
hooked think about your own life have
you ever had a crush on someone and it
feels like you can't think of anything
except when you're going to get that
next text from them now let's say that
you're in this Zone and you hear a slack
work notification while you're waiting
your brain doesn't light up up because
you know it's not them well I guess now
in my case it actually could be because
rich is on our team but you get what I
mean but then let's say that you hear
your phone's default notification sound
your heart's going to start pumping
you'll immediately drop everything
you're doing all your priorities and
lunge for your phone only to find its
Twitter letting you know that your
friend tweeted a pick of their six out
of 10 Lune but do you see the point
social media doesn't addict You by
always giving you something good which
is the common perception it addicts You
by making you feel like there can be
something great that if you you just
keep checking those notifications and
keep scrolling just for that little bit
longer you might win the lottery and so
that's why many social media platforms
actually specifically choose to not have
their own unique notification sounds
it's to social media's advantage to have
their notifications blend in with each
other it's the same way that Milo always
makes the same noise for everything no
matter what the problem is which compels
me to always have to get up go to him
and find out in case it is something
serious he knows what he's doing and you
might be thinking of this this point hey
this concept reminds me of something oh
yeah it's called gambling and that's not
a coincidence now you know where else
you find variable intermittent rewards
in abundance slot machines slot machines
might not look like they have the
biggest Stakes I was in Vegas recently I
spent quite a while strolling around
casinos and it was fascinating because
while on the betting tables where people
were playing poker and blackjack the
minimum amount you could bet was between
$10 and $50 per turn depending on the
time of day on the slot machines you
could bet with as little as 5 cents and
yet slot machines still generate over
half of an average casino's Revenue how
well because they have been fine-tuned
for decades to be the perfect attention
traps just like social media their
profit is directly proportional to time
spent on device and just like social
media they've gotten very good at
maximizing that on a traditional slot
machine you pull a lever to spin and
just like the monkeys in spolsky's
experiment you're fed with a variable
intermittent reward you have no idea
when you're going to win big all you
know is that if that lever is pulled
enough times then eventually at some
point in the future it will pay off with
a large jackpot and so it makes it
really hard to walk away from even if
you might have to spend 10 times as much
as the jackpot amount to actually win it
now where do you notice that exact same
action and feeling oh yeah refreshing
your feed on a social platform there's
something more exciting and oh come on
this time for sure about pulling that
screen down to refresh than just
clicking a refresh button how often do
you find yourself just going for one
more spin I'm not going to lie to you
sometimes I do this action just for fun
because of how tactile and responsive
they've made the feeling of it and yes
that is not an accident either and SL
machines have only gotten better over
time at engineering your attention
nowadays they are so intelligent they
give people options of how to gamble to
give them the illusion of control which
makes them take bigger risks when people
face big losses and are ready to leave
the machines kick up and start teasing
them with very near misses making them
feel like they're working towards a goal
and they're now so close to getting it
and the machines are nowadays they're
also processing in real time new slot
machines are fitted with powerful chips
that can subtly manipulate the odds as
you play to keep the up and down
smoother to make sure you stay on the
device as long as possible trust me the
more you look into it the scarier it
gets but in the exact same way social
feeds are using the exact same type of
Highly secretive highly complex
algorithms to decide what content to
show you to keep your attention for as
long as possible and probably the worst
current offender of this is X ever since
Elon Musk bought the platform
researchers have found with what you and
I already see on our timelines every day
that the new algorithm is designed to
actively promote content that will make
you angry and disgusted and therefore
more likely to engage and keep scrolling
it's slowly deprioritizing what you came
on there to see in the first place and
prioritizing the sticky web that's going
to keep you on there for as long as
possible to the point where I mean
normal comment sections barely even
exist anymore when you click a public
post and scroll down you're essentially
just in yet another feed within the feed
but here is where it gets really dark
cuz it goes beyond the slot machines
casinos themselves are designed to
eliminate any and all stimuli that might
prompt someone to make a choice outside
of their games because if you can make a
choice then you can choose to leave like
just as an example almost all walkways
you find in a casino are gently curved
without right angles so that you can
remain in that mindless Flow State
instead of reaching a stopping point
where you might actually mentally check
in with yourself and decide that you
want to go this same logic is crucial to
social media design once you have a
user's attention you don't want them
deciding to leave so you might as well
stop them from even thinking about it
and to achieve that what every single
one of these social media platforms does
is eliminate any and all friction in the
experience to make the easiest thing to
do in any given moment to just keep
floating along a great example of this
is Tik tok's user interface the second
you enter the app a video is playing you
don't need to choose what to click on
the vertical video takes up most of your
screen automatically whereas usually to
full screen a video you'd have to either
consciously switch your phone to a
different orientation or click a fiddly
button in the corner all of the
important toggles for interacting with
the content and going deeper into the
app are at the bottom of the screen
right where most people's thumb would
naturally be so you don't need to choose
to dive deeper into the experience and
as you probably guessed the the only
action that is made less easy is leaving
like when you're on Android and you're
trying to use the back gesture you
actually have to swipe away once to
indicate that you want to leave and then
the app will actually show you a
completely different Tik Tok to try and
grab you again and then you have to
swipe away a second time to confirm it
and crucially you can scroll through
videos infinitely it will never end with
every single piece of content also autop
playing eliminating yet another Choice
which all leads to you guessed it Doom
scrolling which just like the curved
walkways in a casino provide you with no
natural point to stop and check in with
yourself and that's why we all end up in
these scrolling sessions where we
completely forget where we are who we're
with and the entire passage of time
until some sort of external trigger
comes into remind us now the thing that
really gets me about all of this is that
we know these are deliberate decisions
and we know this very well because there
are people out there blowing the whistle
on it like AAR Ruskin who actually
invented the infinite scroll in 2006 he
figured at the time that it would make
for better search engine results you
know clicking through to the next page
was just a little bit of friction that
he saw he could eliminate to smooth
things out but he didn't realize what it
would be turned into and now he's found
out Raskin has publicly apologized a
million times for inventing it and has
now gone completely the other way to
found the center for Humane technology
with ex Google ethicist Tristan Harris
who went from working at something
literally called the persuasive
technology lab when he studied at
Stanford to then working at Google
trying to to change them from the inside
only to quit when he realized he
couldn't you might have seen this guy
give testimony multiple times in US
Congress talking about what these big
tech companies do but also Shan Parker
the first president of Facebook has
publicly called Facebook's business
model a social validation feedback loop
exploiting a vulnerability in human
psychology and has himself admitted that
we understood this and we did it anyway
yikes so now that we understand the
beast from the inside it's not like the
companies are going to change their own
accord so what I would recommend is on a
personal level you take control take 20
minutes once to go through and disable
all notification types that don't
actually serve you which just exist to
prod you into mindlessly starting a new
session for a few minutes I promise you
you don't need to know every time a
friend comments on another friend's
Instagram pick that you haven't even
interacted with turn off autoplay
wherever possible and if you're on an
iPhone use the scheduled summary feature
which means you're not missing
notifications you're just saving them
all for later together and the key thing
is just reintroduce a little bit of that
friction back in yourself even just
pushing your most distracting social
media apps from your home screen to the
one page next to it is already enough to
reduce your unintentional usage time and
that's all I'm trying to save you from I
think there's loads of great things to
be entertained by and to learn from on
social media but I don't want you to
feel manipulated against your will by
hyper intelligent algorithms that
understand your psyche better than you
do now this video is also sponsored by
surf shark VPN but I don't want to do a
normal ad and just explain how it works
again and again I just want to show you
one image this one image explains
basically everything you need to know
one surf shark account supports
unlimited devices others don't surf
shark has one of the highest number of
server locations which gives you access
to more countries and higher speeds and
surf shark has a ton of other safety
features which complement the VPN and
they're all included in that one price
which also happens to be Rock Bottom
with the code boss Sur shock VPN is
stupendously cheap right now it's $209 a
month with an extra 4 months for free
and a day money back guarantee if you
don't for some reason find it useful so
Link in the description